All right. Well, now, what further questions?
Well, I think, actually, all that we have you to,
really, is 1953, when you're going to leave the
Bureau, when you, well, really until 51, when you
begin, evidently, to think about leaving the
Bureau of Mines in 51 or 52. And you leave in 53. Is
there any particular reason why you decided to
leave the government and join academe?
Yes, I think there were specific reasons. One, I
felt that
it was going to be many years before we were going to
go into a synthetic fuel program because of the
vast reserves of the Middle East. And I felt under
those circumstances that...
less interested in synthetic fields. And so to
that extent, I had thought that this thing was so
far off in the future that I'd do better to devote a
considerable amount of my energy to other
studies. And so I came out here to the University of
Maryland. I did continue a modest amount of work
with the Spencer Chemical Company and the El Paso
Natural Gas Company. But I also did a good deal of
consulting work in connection with building
ammonia plants and urea plants and things of that
nature. And I didn't really resume my interest in
synthetic fuels until the late 1960s. And I think
officially that's the way it might be expressed. I
have another question for you. It's sort of a
loaded question. Do you suppose if you had a chance
to go back through the government documents
again, through the German documents and the
government documents again, would they call
things back to your attention you think that you
had missed before? Well, during the past few
years, since my interest in synthetic fuels has
revived, I have done a lot of that. I have reviewed a
lot of that. And in connection with this work for
the National Academy of Engineering, we have, in
fact, reviewed every process that is publicly
described for either the fissure structure or the
cool hydrogenation process. That includes
things like the Winklers and the Schmalfeld and
the... Yes, yes it does. I see. And those reports
from the National Academy of Engineers, as I say,
there have been five committees working on them,
and there's about six or eight men on each
committee. And those reports ought to be out this
year. I'll
look for those. OK. Oh, stop the record a minute.
Now, that's the reason why I'm interested in how,
when you go back through these documents in
archives,
And we look at them. Let me begin a question with a
question, which is a dumb way to do things. But if
one is an historian and he goes over the same
sources from five different angles, usually
other things occur to him as he goes through. That
is, he looks for different things. For example,
when he's reading a letter and writing a book,
things that you missed the first time occur to you
the second time. Is the same thing true in your
work? Yes, it is. Every time I go over this, I see
certain things from a different angle. And... see
things that I didn't see before, and I'm sure that
if I went over
data again, I would still see other angles. But as a
matter of fact, my interest in this is continuing,
and I am doing that to the extent that I can, even at
the present time. Okay. Now, so when you look at a
document, you say, well, since I'm using Germans
and synthetic fuels as an example, I'm going to
stay with them. You're saying, now, if they had
dropped this and done this, for example, then this
might possibly work? That's the way you arrive at
things? Yeah. All right. And do you also say, then,
if they had done this and this, if we add this in
terms of modern technology, would that be the
solution? Yes, and...
Now, what I want to know is... I think that ERDA
has... is paying people like the Floor
Corporation and other people to try and do that
right now. And they are making extensive cost
studies of various combinations of processes and
everything like this to try to arrive at more
economical solutions. Now, if I understand it
presently, that there are at least two approaches
to the use of synthetic oils, one trying to build
should I say, or add to the information from World
War I in terms of continuous use of technology and
the other trying to turn the direction of the
technology. Okay, that's... And I also should
mention to you that the University of Utah is doing
some very interesting work that...
By the way, I think it's referred to in that paper,
so you can get a copy of their work. The man out there
to talk to if you want to talk to him about the
University of New York is Wendell Weiser. He's the
man who runs the work out there. Was he involved in?
He's been involved in this committee work at the
National Academy of Engineers. He would be a very
good man to talk to. Okay. When did this National
Academy of Engineers work begin? When did their
work begin in synthetic fuels? Well, now I've got
to answer that in two ways. We started
gasification work at the National Academy of
Engineering and studied high BTU gasification
about six or eight years ago. And this last program
started about two years ago, dealing
particularly with synthetic fuels, which is your
prime interest in this interview, I think. Has
there been much connection between the National
Academy and, for instance, the high gas process
development at the Illinois Institute of
Technology? Yes, we've had very close contact
with those people. As a matter of fact, Henry
Liven, who's the president of high gas, is on one of
the committees of the National Academy of
Engineering. And Frank Skora, who is the vice
president of IGT, is a very good personal friend of
mine, and I've talked to him quite often. And we
have one man by the name of Bill Bodle who is on the
liquefaction committee that we're talking
about. So they're well involved in this. And the
oil companies have people on these committees.
The universities have people on these
committees, and so on and so forth. You better get a
good story about these committees from Bob
Crozier. Yes. Because I think you ought to give a
little story. No question about it. No question
about it. Because it seems like the decisions... A
few pages, anyway. Oh, to be sure. Because it seems
like the culmination of this is in the National
Academy. And you know there's been all kinds of
cost studies made on this by ECAS and by Florida
Corporation and by... Parsons and by practically
every big construction company in the country
paid for by IRDA, or partly paid for by IRDA. And the
oil companies themselves have made cost studies
and so on and so forth. So it's a very, very broad
attack on the problem.
I take it that you came straight into the chemistry
department here at Maryland in 53, 54. Chemical
engineering. Chemical engineering department,
excuse me. Chemical engineering department.
Yes, yes. And then remained here from 53? Yes. The
work I did from 53 to 60 on coal hydrogenation was on
a consulting basis. Okay. It had nothing to do with
the University of Maryland. And did your... What
were your interests other than synthetic fuels
between 53 and, I know it's hard to ask me what his
interests were over the last 20 years, but I mean in
terms of professional... Well, largely I got
involved in, aside from the small amount of work I
did in synthetic, in coal hydrogenation at that
time, my work was largely in connection with
ammonia and urea plants, and I served as a
consulting chemical engineer for the Indonesian
government for seven years out of that time. We
built two plants for producing ammonia and urea,
one in Sumatra and one in Java, and that took most of
my time. I did quite a lot of work for the Atomic
Energy Commission. I work for Reynolds Metals
Company and various corporations. I think it's
all in my, not in detail, but my... No, I can't,
partially it's here in your vitae. All right.
Orrin, do you have any questions? Yes, I'd like to
inquire, do you ever, going back to the TOM, the
technical oil mission that we started, that we
talked about earlier, do you ever see any of these
technical oil mission people? Are they in
business or are they in industry or have they, like
you, put their... earlier experience to work, or
did they go on into something else? Do you see these
people? Do you know? I saw them for a period of
perhaps eight to ten years after we concluded that
work, up until about 1960 or so. But since then,
I've seen very little of them. But most of those
people are probably, many of them I know are
retired. I still have Christmas cards from them
and things like that, but they're retired and
they're out of the work. One or two of them are still
active. One or two of the Bureau of Mines people,
Zeke Clark and Martin Elliott and a few people like
that are still active, but there are a few of them.
And you know Henry Linden, I mentioned the IGT
person. He once made the statement that at the time
this oil problem broke on us in the late 60s, or
however you want to put it, that there probably
weren't more than 100 to 200 people who really knew
anything about synthetic fuels who were still
active. And I guess that's probably a fair
statement, really. And that left a tremendous gap
in our technological ability and made it very
difficult for her to get started. What we're
trying to do is to rebuild this technology.
What astonished me about it all was that a whole
technology such as the Germans had built up could
be completely lost. It was completely lost in
Germany, too. I've talked to the Germans, and some
of them hardly knew that there was a German
synthetic fuel technology, the younger German
people. That's a very good point. What would you
say accounted for the lack of transition between
wartime and peacetime Well, I think, again, it was
this tremendous flood of oil that took all the
synthetic fuel technology out of the picture. It
wouldn't be political. I don't think it was
political. I don't think it was political. And I
don't think it had anything to do with the fact that
the oil companies necessarily wanted to lose the
technology. I think it was a fact that the
economics were against the technology and there
was little reason to support it. You know about the
fisher tropics plants in South Africa, don't you?
Yes, the Sasso. You know there is the Sasso plant.
It's about a 5,000 barrel a day plant, which was
built in 1953. And that was the last big synthetic
fuel plant that was ever built. And now, of course,
you know that they are building another plant,
much like the Sasso plant. It's not exactly the
same design, but it's similar. And it's supposed
to produce 40,000 barrels. I think it's about 100
miles from Cecil. It's a new location. But the
South Africans, I think, have taken the position
that they want an independent oil production
regardless of economic costs. That's not a bad
position to take because I think we... We may have
to take the same position. Yes, who knows? And
maybe we will. And when they do, if such a decision
is made, for instance, by the National Academy or
by anybody... Or by her or the government. I don't
want the government to do less. The more we fool
with that, the better off we are, in my opinion.
Yes, right. As a matter of fact, the Texas A&M
University and the Center for Energy and Mental
Resources prides itself on the fact that we have
turned to private industry for our support,
and we did not... Yes, you've got all private
industry. Yes. There were no funds there either.
Rockefeller Foundation. Oh, no. This is all done
by... It's not funded in any way by... Erd is
interested, and Erd is... I'm glad to know that.
Oh, we have... This is not for... It doesn't
matter. ...people that are still around or...
you feel might have had some experiences that
might... Miller's dead, isn't he? You don't know,
huh? Yeah, he is dead. He's an older man than that.
He is dead. That's Albert Miller. Albert E.
Miller, yeah, he's gone. Farragut is gone. There
was a fellow by the name of Jones at Coppers who was
very active. Kenneth Gordon is gone. Allred is
dead, I believe. Harold
Atwell was with me a lot. I believe Harold Atwell,
he's retired from the Texas company. I know
whether he's dead or not, I don't know. Those
are the ones that occurred to my mind.
Well, we know Petty John is still alive. Petty
John's still living. He's in Sarasota. He wasn't
with our group, but he was certainly a very active
one. He led the oil mission, the Navy oil mission
over there, right? And I'm sure he can tell a few
people from his own mission that may be around and
so on and so on. There's one or two people in the oil
companies that I know are still active, but their
names get away from me. There was a Reiser or a
Rensler or a Rissler or somebody up in
Connecticut. I remember reading about Richler,
Reisler, Rensler. What's that name? I can't think
of his name. I think the best thing for you to do,
though, is to get those names off those reels,
because those papers were all authored by people
who were involved in the missions.
Right. I just thought if you were still on good
terms with them locally, we could pick up the phone
and say howdy. A lot of these people I saw very
little after the mission was over. And our few
meetings here in Washington, and it's only when
you give me the names that I recall them. Whereas
the people I worked with in the Bureau of Mines, I
mean, I had much closer association with them. And
they and their names stick in my mind. But most of
those people, too, are either retired or dead.
Would
you want to hazard a guess on what you think the
future of synthetic oil is to the country? That is,
do you think it's going to come or not come? Well,
I think that
the United States particularly has
got to find some way to convert our large reserves
of coal to liquid and gaseous fuels.
And
I think that synthetic fuels has to come. But
whether it's before the year 2000 or not, I don't
know. And that will depend, I think, not only on our
own technical ability, which is part of the story.
I think there are technical possibilities that
have still not yet been properly explored. But
it's also going to depend on what attitude the
Arabs take future cost of oil. My own feeling is
also that we're going to have to develop our
nuclear energy plants. I see no other solution to
this than to develop nuclear energy. We've got to
learn to live with this nuclear energy. We have to
learn to take care of those plant residues and so on
and so forth. And we've got to get this big load from
the electric power plants off of coal and off of oil
and gas as fast as we can, I believe. That's my
opinion of the situation. Now, if you ask me about
solar energy and wind energy and things like this,
I think these are all future, maybe after the year
2000, but I can't see that far ahead, really.
That's all I need to know. Do you need to know
anything for your program? No, I can't think of
anything. Anything you'd like to add? No, I think
that covers practically everything. Do we sit
here and exhaust you for three hours? Yes.